[KEP-2400] swap updates, beta3 graduation and GA criterias (#4701)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/2400-node-swap/README.md

> # KEP-2400: Node system swap enablement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# KEP-2400: Node memory swap support
```
The authoritative title is the title of the KEP issue.

Reviewer 2: The same here.

can perform testing and provide data to continue building cluster capabilities
on top of swap.

Since swap enablement is crucial to many different parties, this KEP aims to
introduce basic swap enablement and leave further extensions to follow-up KEPs,
that are already being worked on and will be introduced in the very near future.
This way Kubernetes users / vendors would be able to use swap in a basic manner
quickly while extensions would be brought to discussion in dedicated KEPs that
would progress in the meantime.

> For example, to achieve this goal, this KEP does not introduce any new APIs.

Reviewer 3: I think technically kubelet config fields are APIs, maybe `does not change the pod API`?

Author: Good point.
I wanted to emphasize that currently customizing how swap behaves is not really supported. You're right that setting `LimitedSwap` or `NoSwap` is an API, but it doesn't let you customize anything, but instead currently serves as an "on/off" API.

Changed to the following. WDYT?

```suggestion
For example, to achieve this goal, this KEP does not introduce any APIs
that allow customizing how the feature behaves, but instead only determines 
whether the feature is enabled or disabled.
```

Instead, the behaviour is automatic and implicit that requires minimum user
intervention (see [proposal below](#steps-to-calculate-swap-limit) for more details).
As mentioned above, in the very near future, follow-up KEPs would bring API extension

> and customizability, supporting zram/zswap, and many other extensions to discussion.

Reviewer 4: I tested this feature with zram on fedora 40 and I didn’t see any issues. I think zswap may need some work.

Author: Thanks! Removed zram, left zswap in there.

can perform testing and provide data to continue building cluster capabilities
on top of swap.

This KEP aims to
introduce basic swap enablement and leave further extensions to follow-up KEPs.
This way Kubernetes users / vendors would be able to use swap in a basic manner
quickly while extensions would be brought to discussion in dedicated KEPs that
would progress in the meantime.

For example, to achieve this goal, this KEP does not introduce any APIs
that allow customizing how the feature behaves, but instead only determines 
whether the feature is enabled or disabled.

> Instead, the behaviour is automatic and implicit that requires minimum user

Reviewer 5: As we are trying to GA this, do we have any feedback on the calculations we offered here? So far the only feedback I was getting was on Unlimited. 

Also:
1. @tallclair once this is GA, InPlace pod update KEP will need to agjust these calculations as well. Are you tracking this?
2. The calculation becomes de-facto the standard. So it will be hard to change. Do we have some kind of conformance testing we can do?

Author: >As we are trying to GA this, do we have any feedback on the calculations we offered here? So far the only feedback I was getting was on Unlimited.

I feel the same - the only feedback I was getting is that some people want to bring back UnlimitedSwap, which was removed. On the other hand, UnlimitedSwap is indeed more dangerous, as a single pod can bring instability to the entire node.

Personally I think that it's reasonable to bring UnlimitedSwap back as long as we properly document that it's dangerous to use, but I don't have a strong opinion on this.

>@tallclair once this is GA, InPlace pod update KEP will need to agjust these calculations as well. Are you tracking this?

Yeah that's a good point. Thanks for pointing that out.
FWIW @tallclair I'll gladly help with implementing this.

> The calculation becomes de-facto the standard. So it will be hard to change. Do we have some kind of conformance testing we can do?

Yes, we do.
I've presented "swap-conformance" tests that thoroughly cover this.

[1] https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-node-kubelet#kubelet-swap-conformance-fedora-serial
[2] https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-node-kubelet#kubelet-swap-conformance-ubuntu-serial

Author: Thanks @yujuhong for raising this into attention.
I've now opened this issue to track this and assigned myself to it. As said above, I'd be happy to help with the implementation. @tallclair let me know if there are any special thoughts from your side.

can perform testing and provide data to continue building cluster capabilities
on top of swap.

Since swap enablement is crucial to many different parties, this KEP aims to
introduce basic swap enablement and leave further extensions to follow-up KEPs,

> that are already being worked on and will be introduced in the very near future.

Reviewer 4: This would get a bit stale over time. Let's drop this.

Reviewer 4: this KEP aims to
introduce basic swap enablement and leave further extensions to follow-up KEPs.

Author: Makes sense, thank you!
Done.

Reviewer 6: @kannon92 are you aware of further extensions and existing keps i can follow?

Author: @Siegfriedk Due to me being out of office for a while, opening the follow-up KEPs was delayed.
However, I will get to it soon.
Would you like me to cc you once I do?

Reviewer 6: Yes pls :)

Author: Will do! :)

can perform testing and provide data to continue building cluster capabilities
on top of swap.

This KEP aims to
introduce basic swap enablement and leave further extensions to follow-up KEPs.
This way Kubernetes users / vendors would be able to use swap in a basic manner
quickly while extensions would be brought to discussion in dedicated KEPs that
would progress in the meantime.

For example, to achieve this goal, this KEP does not introduce any APIs
that allow customizing how the feature behaves, but instead only determines 
whether the feature is enabled or disabled.
Instead, the behaviour is automatic and implicit that requires minimum user
intervention (see [proposal below](#steps-to-calculate-swap-limit) for more details).

> As mentioned above, in the very near future, follow-up KEPs would bring API extension

Reviewer 7: Per the feedback from the SIG-Node meeting today, it's good to have early exploration to make sure whatever we GA is compatible with the future changes. If you already have some thoughts on this, maybe you could add a few sentences here. @iholder101

Author: I've reshaped this section, mentioning that currently we have only two on/off swap behaviors with no APIs or customizability (`NoSwap` and `LimitedSwap`), and that in the future we'll add customizability through adding more swap behaviors that might lead to API changes, perhaps at the pod level.

It was agreed many times before that this KEP would revolve around basic swap enablement. I've intentionally left this vague as API changes is a controversial, complex and serious topic, and I prefer to have proper discussions about it in a follow-up KEP. As agreed upon in yesterday's sig-node meeting, I'll start working on a sketch document to initiate these conversations which will serve as a first step for a follow-up KEP.

PTAL

This is the total amount of swap available for all the Burstable QoS pods; let's call it `TotalPodsSwapAvailable`. This will ensure that the system critical daemons will have access to the swap at least equal to the system reserved memory. This will indirectly act as having support for swap in system reserved.

#### Swap Aware Eviction Manager

While progressing this feature to stable, we found a major gap in this feature. The eviction manager must protect the node from saturation of swap memory. If a node exhausts swap memory, this can take down the node. In some customer cases, OOMKiller could step in to save the node but this should not be the default option.

Due to this, we want to enhance the eviction manager to be aware of swap. The eviction manager must step in when the node becoming unstable and start evicting pods that are swapping first.

> At a high level to do this, we will introduce a new eviction signal to track swap usage on the node. Users can toggle this usage based on their risk.

Reviewer 4: I think an update from @iholder101 is needed. My commit was the last one.

> At a high level to do this, we will introduce a new eviction signal to track swap usage on the node. Users can toggle this usage based on their risk.

Reviewer 8: From my experience using this feature in multiple build and production clusters over more than a year:
1. On modern Linux the OOMKiller is really good and we did not experience any issues due to disabled memory evictions. It made stuff better in a lot of cases. 
2. Swap usage is also not an issue at all. We often see swap usage and free memory on nodes. Most workload simply has stuff which can be safely swapped. As a result we usually got a lot more cache available to Linux. 
3. Issues arrise when a lot of Swap In/Out occurs. That is completely independent of swap usage. It might be only 5GB of swap used (out of 16 or 32GB) but heavy swap in/out overloading the disk. We found that you primarily have to monitor IOPs and MB/s read/write on your disk. It might be worth evicing based on that. I.e. each pod get 1000 IOPs and 100MB/s or something similar. This never crashed stuff for us but if multiple heavy swapping workloada meet they might slow down considerably.

> At a high level to do this, we will introduce a new eviction signal to track swap usage on the node. Users can toggle this usage based on their risk.

Author: @haircommander @kannon92 thank you, the section is now updated.
@jabdoa2 thanks for your input! As the KEP now suggests, we will introduce a swap-aware eviction manager to ensure swap is entirely stable. More details can be found in: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/129578.

For example, separating memory and swap memory is problematic because swap is not used until memory is full.
However, with the approach suggested in this KEP memory will not be considered full until the accessible swap is also full.

#### Defining "accessible swap"

Let `accessible swap` be the amount of swap that is accessible by pods according to the [LimitedSwap swap behavior](#steps-to-calculate-swap-limit).
Note that the amount of accessible swap changes in time according to the pods running on the node.

In addition, note that since only some of the Burstable QoS pods will have access to swap, the swap space will
almost never be used in its entirety by workloads. In other words, this approach will effectively leave some of
the swap space inaccessible for pods and reserved for system daemons and other system processes.

#### Changes to the eviction manager's memory pressure handling

When dealing with evictions, there are two main questions needed to be answered:
how to identify when the node is under pressure and how to rank pods for eviction.

The eviction manager will become swap aware by making the following changes to its memory pressure handling:

> - **How to identify pressure**: The eviction manager will consider the total sum of all running pods' accessible swap as additional memory capacity.

Reviewer 7: What if the memory pressure comes from pods that cannot use swap? If their memory usage continue to grow, we'd still want to evict pods, no? Does the current proposal take into account of that?

Reviewer 8: This would occur according to their usage compared request (see: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/node-pressure-eviction/#pod-selection-for-kubelet-eviction). In general eviction technically does not require any pod to even use more than their request. In practice there should be as much memory as can be requested and pods should not be evicted before they exceed their request (it does happen though, i.e. if your system reserve is not set properly). With this change the more memory becomes available to request (in the form of swap). Everything else stays the same and eviction will use the same general order and logic.

Reviewer 7: That's for deciding the pod eviction order, but my question is more about triggering the eviction in kubelet. Say, there's only one pod that can use swap, and the node still has plenty of swap space but is short on memory, would the usage be considered over the threshold and trigger eviction?

Author: > Say, there's only one pod that can use swap, and the node still has plenty of swap space but is short on memory, would the usage be considered over the threshold and trigger eviction?

In the scenario you're describing the desired outcome AFAICT is to start using swap before triggering eviction. Since swapping is a heavy operation from the kernel's perspective, it does so only when the memory is low enough and there's no other choice. If evictions were to be triggered only in case the node is short on memory, but not short on swap, the kernel would never have the opportunity to start swapping pages, since the eviction would always kill workloads before the kernel would become pressured.

The idea behind the suggested design is that swap (at least the "accessible swap") needs to be used before evictions are triggered in order for it to become usable.

That being said, if there are no pods that have access to swap, hence the "accessible swap" is zero, the eviction behavior stays the same as it is before this KEP.

Reviewer 7: > The idea behind the suggested design is that swap (at least the "accessible swap") needs to be used before evictions are triggered in order for it to become usable.

IIUC, a pod can be configured to have a large amount of accessible swap, but use only very little of it due to its actually very small memory footprint. This means that the node will have 'accessible swap" but no other pods are eligible to use. And the node can still be under memory pressure without triggering eviction.

Did I misunderstand this?

Reviewer 3: that's a great point. imagine a world where a node has a 1:1 swap to memory ratio, the node has 10 gb of node allocatable memory, and a pod requests 1gb of memory. That'd mean it also has 1gb of swap. If other pods are using the full remaining 9 GB, but the one swapping pod uses no memory, and the eviction threshold is 85%, then the node would be at 81% utilization. However, since we don't use memory.low or anything, the kernel would likely allocate that 1GB to the remaining pods (assuming overcommit is allowed) and they use it. At some point the utilization would become 90% (10/11 GB used) and then eviction would happen (if OOM didn't happen first, which could happen depending on which pods manage to overcommit). 

I guess the above example would really be risky if there was double swap from memory (10 memory, 20 swap). Then, the accessible swap of our 1gb pod would be 2gb, and the total memory would be 12 gb, but the accessible would only be 10, putting us below our eviction threshold. This seems extreme but I suppose is possible. Is this case concerning to you @yujuhong ? how do y'all feel about this hypothetical @jabdoa2 @iholder101

Reviewer 7: Yep. Thanks Peter for writing down the examples! That's exactly what I was thinking -- free swap space not really accessible by some pods skews the eviction threshold. I didn't do the numbers to calculate the likelihood of this happening, but Peter's examples don't seem impossible, right?

Reviewer 8: Question
===
I guess the question here is twofold:
1. What it the trigger for eviction?
2. What is the order?

Options
===
For 1 we got two options:
1a) When we run out of memory and out of swap (or reach 90%)
1b) When we run out of memory (or got less than 100M left)

For 2 we got the general order:
```
1. Whether the pod's resource usage exceeds requests
2. [Pod Priority](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/)
3. The pod's resource usage relative to requests
```
Question is what is requests here?
2a) Its swap + memory request
2b) Its just memory requests
2c) Its memory requests for pods which are not allowed to swap and swap + memory requests for pods which are allowed to swap.

Analysis
===

Obviously, only 1a is not cutting it as trigger as the example above shows. Also you could probably imagine examples where only 2a is not enough (i.e. if you got a lot more swap than memory). I guess we need both of them. Maybe you would set 1b as soft trigger (so it does not trigger instantly) but you definitely need it.

We obviously detected the situation so what are we going to do? Find the culprit. Here we vaguely talked about "availabled memory" which would include swap. I guess we should consider swap as available only for pods which can actually use it (option 2c).

In your example we would hit trigger 1b and order all our pods. Any pod with swap would be ranked based on their usage compared to memory + swap (so they would probably score well in condition 1 and 3). However, for pods not using swap they would be compared to only their memory request (so they would be evicted earlier - especially if they use more memory than their request). Rational is that Linux can always swap pods allowing swap so there is less need to evict those.

Author: Thanks @haircommander for the clarification.

Firstly, since the scenario you've outlined is possible only in situations where pods would have a large amount of accessible but unused swap. Those pods can opt-out of swap even if are of Burstable QoS by setting memory limits that equal requests:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/ea50baedcd6f8e565bcd91ed78a554bbfac50e1c/pkg/kubelet/kuberuntime/kuberuntime_container_linux.go#L422.

More generally, although I understand this hypothetical, I feel we always circle back to the customization front which we've already agreed to defer to a follow-up. This KEP was designed to be with minimal APIs and to serve a first step of swap enablement. With such minimal APIs and no customization ability it did not, and can not, aim to fit advanced or esoteric use cases.

As I've written many times before, I think it would most benefit the ecosystem to let users experiment with basic swap enablement (which there's a high demand for) and have a proper and long discussion about how to tackle the controversial topic of changing APIs in a follow-up. The ground is set for that with the concept of kubelet's "swap behaviors".

My opinion is we should document this as a limitation and circle back to it in a follow-up.
@yujuhong WDYT?

Reviewer 8: Just a small addon: We have been running swap on all our clusters (15 clusters with ca 10-150 nodes each) with disabled memory eviction. We found no issues whatsoever with memory pressure on our nodes as long as we set proper memory requests for kubernetes components (i.e. kube-proxy or kubelet). That is probably generally good advise but not super trivial to get right as memory usage depends on the number of nodes and pods. Nevertheless, this feature is overall extremely stable and we did not encounter any issues in production over the last one and a half years.

Reviewer 7: @iholder101 I'm definitely not advocating for changing APIs at this point. Allowing more customizability is out of the scope of this KEP. (And expecting users to set resource requests properly to avoid hitting scenarios like this also doesn't seem like the best course to me) :) 

The only thing I'm trying to ensure here is that the memory eviction works reasonably given that swap behavior we defined today. The fact that we may not trigger memory eviction at all due to inaccessible swap space seems like a real issue. Could we make sure to consider all those cases?

@jabdoa2 disabling memory eviction is one way to solve this, but I don't have confidence on that working with a diverse set of workloads, and I believe this is not something SIG-Node wants to recommend at this point (please correct me if I'm wrong).

Reviewer 3: I think ultimately the worst a cluster admin would have to do given swap is lower the eviction threshold. If they want to prioritize eviciton happening that seems possible and reasonable. we can come up with a scheme to show what to set eviction thresholds to given certain swap/memory ratios and then have e2e tests to test some of those scenerios?

* Inaccessible Swap: The memory eviction threshold is configured in such a way that swap is never triggered during node-level pressure, 
as eviction occurs before the node starts swapping memory.
* Unfairness & Instability: The eviction manager may evict the "wrong" or innocent pods, failing to address the actual memory pressure.
* Unexpected Behavior: Pods that exceed their memory limits (with regular and swap memory) are not evicted first,
even though they would immediately get killed if swap were not used.

Here we present an extension to the eviction manager that will address these issues by becoming swap-aware.
The proposed logic is fully backward compatible and requires no additional configuration, making it completely transparent to the user.

To achieve this, we recommend enhancing the eviction manager's memory pressure handling to account for swap memory, rather than adding a distinct swap signal.
Memory and swap are inherently connected and should be addressed as a single issue.
By integrating swap memory into the eviction manager's logic, we ensure a more accurate and efficient handling of system resources.

> For example, separating memory and swap memory is problematic because swap is not used until memory is full.

Reviewer 3: nit: it could also be relevant to say memory won't really be "full" before swap kicks in either

Author: Sounds great, added a sentence about that.

#### Defining "accessible swap"

Let `accessible swap` be the amount of swap that is accessible by pods according to the [LimitedSwap swap behavior](#steps-to-calculate-swap-limit).

> Note that the amount of accessible swap changes in time according to the pods running on the node.

Reviewer 3: I think this could use reference as to why: not every pod is allocated swap, and the full swap space isn't used. In max swap case every pod is BestEffort and is allocated the swap/memory ratio, but even then there (should be) system reserved space that will take away from workload memory. Thus the max amount of available swap to workloads is the  sum of the allocated swap of each best effort pod

#### Changes to the eviction manager's memory pressure handling

The main idea is the following:
- The eviction manager will consider accessible swap as additional memory capacity.
- In the context of ranking pods for evictions, swap memory is considered as additional "regular" memory.
This is relevant for checking whether memory requests are exceeded [1] or for identifying which pods uses more memory [2].

> - When the memory eviction threshold is reached, pods that use more memory and swap than their memory limits are being killed first.

Reviewer 3: note: this will mean that swapping pods will pretty much 100% of the time be punished first. Part of me wonders if the eviciton manager should take memory limit + accessible swap as the max amount of memory allocated to that pod, and then treat that as the limit, rather than just taking limit. There are tradeoffs to each and I think they can be enumerated.

Reviewer 8: Let me weight in.

Behaviour without swap: Eviction can happen as soon as a pod uses more than its reservation. It should not happen before that.
Options with swap:
A) Evictions can happen once you exceed your reservation (vs memory + swap) - kind of as before but it would cause issues for our workloads
B) Eviction can happen once you exceed reservation + swap limit (vs memory + swap) - our preferred solution

I would vote for (B). Otherwise swap would not work for tightly packed workloads.

Author: > Behaviour without swap: Eviction can happen as soon as a pod uses more than its reservation. It should not happen before that.

What do you mean by "reservation" in this context?
Let me remind you that an eviction process only takes place once there's a node-level pressure. Otherwise, a termination of an individual pod is only handled by cgroups and the kernel's OOM killer.

Reviewer: There are two kinds of eviction, which in the docs we term _node pressure eviction_ and _API-initiated eviction_. See https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/#pod-disruption

Reviewer: Swap use would always trigger node-pressure eviction.

Reviewer: My opinion(s):

Pods using less than their request of memory should rarely be evicted, and their swap use or memory use shouldn't be grounds to select them.
Pods using less more their limit of actual memory could be evicted if there is OOM or low node memory, even if there are lower priority Pods that could also be evicted. Using more than your memory limit isn't acceptable.
Pods using less than their limit of memory could be evicted if there is OOM or low node memory, and no lower-priority Pod is a better candidate.

If Pods have a number calculated that is not a resource request or a resource limit, and that number ("reservation"?) is used in eviction calculations, we should aim to surface that number in Pod status.

We may have a problem with swap use: tmpfs. How do we tell if a page chargeable to a Pod should be accounted for as a container using memory, vs if that page is part of an `emptyDir` volume backed my memory? Or maybe we don't care because it's (virtual) memory use either way.

Author: Thanks @sftim for the clarification.
I'm obviously referring to node-pressure evictions here, which are relevant to kubelet and sig-node.

IIUC API-initiated evictions are triggered by autoscalers / deschedulers / admins, not by kubelet, and are out-of-scope for this proposal.

Author: > My opinion(s):
> 
> Pods using less than their request of memory should rarely be evicted, and their swap use or memory use shouldn't be grounds to select them.

:+1: 

> Pods using less more their limit of actual memory could be evicted if there is OOM or low node memory, even if there are lower priority Pods that could also be evicted. Using more than your memory limit isn't acceptable. Pods using less than their limit of memory could be evicted if there is OOM or low node memory, and no lower-priority Pod is a better candidate.

I think you have a typo there ("Pods using less more their limit ...").

So let's see if I understand you correctly. Do you say that:
* Using more than limits (using swap) is OK until there's low node memory. In this case these pods should always be evicted first.
* pods using less than memory limits will be evicted based on priority.

If this is what you meant, I entirely agree. If not, please correct me.

> If Pods have a number calculated that is not a resource request or a resource limit, and that number ("reservation"?) is used in eviction calculations, we should aim to surface that number in Pod status.

I think the number you're referring to is what I call "accessible swap".
The problem with surfacing this into status IMHO is that the current swap logic is under the (only) `LimitedSwap` swap behavior mode. I'd rather report the eviction decisions via extensive eviction manager logs. BTW, this subject was briefly discussed in sig-node's meeting yesterday, and there seemed to be a consensus around the fact that kubelet logs are good enough for debugging purposes in this stage. However maybe in the future we can revisit this.

> We may have a problem with swap use: tmpfs. How do we tell if a page chargeable to a Pod should be accounted for as a container using memory, vs if that page is part of an `emptyDir` volume backed my memory? Or maybe we don't care because it's (virtual) memory use either way.

Great thought! :)
Firstly, https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/124060 uses the tmpfs `noswap` mount option to make sure these pages are not able to swap.
If we're not talking about swap specifically, but about how pages from memory-backed volumes are being accounted, I think it's out of scope for the swap proposal. IIUC, pages from memory-backed volumes are accounted for as additional "regular" memory pages.

Reviewer: It's possible that the kubelet root directory is also on tmpfs. That sounds like a niche situation we could cover through docs ("don't do that / we don't support it").

> I think the number you're referring to is what I call "accessible swap".

Maybe. I was thinking more of reporting the _threshold_: how much virtual (RAM pages plus pages in swap space) memory a cgroup can use before eviction would happen. We can report that threshold even when kubelet is set to refuse swap use.

Author: > It's possible that the kubelet root directory is also on tmpfs. That sounds like a niche situation we could cover through docs ("don't do that / we don't support it").

:+1: 

> > I think the number you're referring to is what I call "accessible swap".
> 
> Maybe. I was thinking more of reporting the _threshold_: how much virtual (RAM pages plus pages in swap space) memory a cgroup can use before eviction would happen.

Yes, then I think we're talking about the same thing.

> We can report that threshold even when kubelet is set to refuse swap use.

That's not a bad idea. If we go down this route, I'd report the swap threshold seperately from memory threshold which is already reported as memory limit.

As always of course the problem with changing the pod spec is that it's a highly controversial topic. Do you have a suggestion of where we should report this?

Reviewer 6: @sftim "even if there are lower priority Pods that could also be evicted." if i have a stateful workload, which i put on a higher priority than, lets say a monitoring pod, i would want that higher priority pod to be saved and the lower priority pod getting evicted.

At least thats the setup we have.

Reviewer: > if i have a stateful workload, which i put on a higher priority than, lets say a monitoring pod, i would want that higher priority pod to be saved and the lower priority pod getting evicted.
> 
> At least thats the setup we have.

Noted, but if you value your stateful workload that much, maybe set a higher memory limit. Bear in mind that OOM kills are also a risk.

Reviewer 6: > > if i have a stateful workload, which i put on a higher priority than, lets say a monitoring pod, i would want that higher priority pod to be saved and the lower priority pod getting evicted.
> > At least thats the setup we have.
> 
> Noted, but if you value your stateful workload that much, maybe set a higher memory limit. Bear in mind that OOM kills are also a risk.

Yes sure but i prefer to get informed that this situation is happening and fixing it after the workload finished than restarting it :)

Reviewer 8: > > Behaviour without swap: Eviction can happen as soon as a pod uses more than its reservation. It should not happen before that.
> 
> What do you mean by "reservation" in this context? Let me remind you that an eviction process only takes place once there's a node-level pressure. Otherwise, a termination of an individual pod is only handled by cgroups and the kernel's OOM killer.

See https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/node-pressure-eviction/#pod-selection-for-kubelet-eviction.

```
The kubelet uses the following parameters to determine the pod eviction order:

1. Whether the pod's resource usage exceeds requests
2. [Pod Priority](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/)
3. The pod's resource usage relative to requests
```

I was referring to (1). That should become memory reservation + swap (reservation) when using swap in my opinion. Same for the value used in (3).

Reviewer 3: I still agree with @jabdoa2 here. Giving pods access to swap is effectively growing the safe amount of memory+swap they're allowed to use. For instance, the kubelet doesn't count memory+swap when deciding available memory on the node, nor does it subtract swap usage when calculating memory capacity. swap is additive and it feels consistent to have that apply to limits as well.

Author: Thanks a lot for the feedback @jabdoa2! I appreciate it a lot.

> I propose to change the existing logic to consider swap as additional request:
>
> ```
> The kubelet uses the following parameters to determine the pod eviction order:
> 1. Consider limits -> That would trigger OOMKiller anyway.
> 2. Whether the pod's resource usage (memory usage + swap usage) exceeds requests (memory requests + swap requests)
> 3. [Pod Priority](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/)
> 4. The pod's resource usage (memory usage + swap usage) relative to requests (memory requests + swap requests)
> ```

I think this actually makes a lot of sense, and I think your use-case is compelling.
So, removing (1) which is not relevant for eviction order, we're left with:
> ```
> The kubelet uses the following parameters to determine the pod eviction order:
> 1. Whether the pod's resource usage (memory usage + swap usage) exceeds requests (memory requests + swap requests)
> 2. [Pod Priority](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/)
> 3. The pod's resource usage (memory usage + swap usage) relative to requests (memory requests + swap requests)
> ```

TLDR: consider swap usage as additional memory usage, consider accessible swap as additional memory request. Obviously, the eviction manager will make sure to log this info to ease debugging.
@haircommander @dchen1107 @yujuhong can I get an ACK from you about this? Any objections?

> If I would add an additional evction rule it would be this:
> 
> ```
> 5. Swap in/out bandwidth of the pod. High swap swap bandwidth would be a typical indicator for out of memory pods.
> ```

That's a great point, and I've actually already started to explore and experiment with it. That being said, this is out of the KEP's scope.

As a spoiler: there are couple of ways to tackle this problem. For example, the eviction manager currently doesn't support any IO pressure handling, so we might want to go with a more generalized KEP. But in any case, this is out of scope for now and will be dealt with in a follow-up.

Reviewer 3: +1 I think swap + memory should be used when evaluating eviction order

Author: Done.
@haircommander can you PTAL?

Reviewer 3: listing it in [alternatives](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4701/files#diff-32d9cbd2b6817965ecee751dfe43b0d91269aee738a5799c9c9a68d04a329ec6R366) rather than the main goal implies we're still going for memory alone as the memory limit. This thread I thought we gained consensus on using memory limit + available swap as the effective swap limit

Author: @haircommander Thanks for catching that, it was obviously a leftover.
Done! PTAL

This user story is addressed by scenario 1 and 2, and could benefit from 3.

> Note: critical / high-priority pods would not be able to access swap, but can

Reviewer 4: Is this true? A critical/ high priority pod that is Burstable would still swap out?

Author: It will be soon, after https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/125277 is merged.
This topic was already brought up to sig-node meeting and there was a consensus that this path forward makes sense.

As written in this KEP update, customizability will be enhanced with follow-up KEPs (that are WIP).

This user story is addressed by scenario 1 and 2, and could benefit from 3.

Note: critical / high-priority pods would not be able to access swap, but can

> still be configured otherwise to gain swap access. In the future, APIs would

Reviewer 3: APIs or additional kubelet swap modes?

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't be surprised if we punt the API driven swap forever, and would first just introduce a critical pod limited swap mode or something.

Author: These are good questions that we don't have the answers to yet :)
I do think that swap will probably be more customizable, but I agree that pods will likely never be able to request it directly. However at this stage I'm not entirely sure if only swap behavior modes will be added or we will add more APIs.

In any case, I've clarified that adding only more swap behaviors (not APIs) is possible

#### Security risk

Enabling swap on a system without encryption poses a security risk, as critical information, such as Kubernetes secrets, may be swapped out to the disk. If an unauthorized individual gains access to the disk, they could potentially obtain these secrets. To mitigate this risk, it is recommended to use encrypted swap. However, handling encrypted swap is not within the scope of kubelet; rather, it is a general OS configuration concern and should be addressed at that level. Nevertheless, it is essential to provide documentation that warns users of this potential issue, ensuring they are aware of the potential security implications and can take appropriate steps to safeguard their system.

> This is now documented and published, e.g. in this blog post: https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/08/24/swap-linux-beta/.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The documentation updates are required; there is already a [blog article](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/08/24/swap-linux-beta/) that mentions the security implications.
```

1. KEPs describe the “desired state”; we mostly don't document progress inline.
2. Security documentation needs to be done within the guidance itself, such as in https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/security-checklist/, and not just in blog articles.

Reviewer 2: @iholder101 Is this suggestion applied? If not, why is it marked as resolved?

Author: Thanks @bart0sh for pointing that out! I think I've made the changes locally but forgot to push :man_facepalming: 

I've now applied the suggestions (and also the ones mentioned [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4701#discussion_r1757496859)).

Thank you!

In the early release of this feature, there was a goal to support cgroup v1. As the feature progressed, sig-node realized that supporting swap with cgroup v1 would be very difficult.
Therefore, this feature is limited to cgroupv2 only. The main goal is to deprecate cgroupv1 eventually so this should not be a major inconvience.

#### Memory-backed volumes

Kubernetes guarantees that some volumes' memory would never reside on disk, e.g. Secrets, memory-backed emptyDirs, etc.
Behind the scenes, Kubelet mounts such volumes as tmpfs volumes on the host.

To address this risk, if `--fail-swap-on=false`, the [tmpfs noswap option](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/filesystems/tmpfs.html)
will be used in order to prevent the volumes' pages from swapping to disk.

Bear in mind that the tmpfs noswap option is fairly new and is supported in kernel versions >= 6.4. However, different

> Linux distributions can decide to backport this options into z-streams of previous versions. Therefore, when

Reviewer 3: i don't know if they all are called z-streams, maybe just `this option to older versions of the kernel`

Author: Thank you! Done :)

Therefore, this feature is limited to cgroupv2 only. The main goal is to deprecate cgroupv1 eventually so this should not be a major inconvience.

#### Memory-backed volumes

Kubernetes guarantees that some volumes' memory would never reside on disk, e.g. Secrets, memory-backed emptyDirs, etc.
Behind the scenes, Kubelet mounts such volumes as tmpfs volumes on the host.

To address this risk, if `--fail-swap-on=false`, the [tmpfs noswap option](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/filesystems/tmpfs.html)
will be used in order to prevent the volumes' pages from swapping to disk.

Bear in mind that the tmpfs noswap option is fairly new and is supported in kernel versions >= 6.4. However, different
Linux distributions can decide to backport this options to older versions of the kernel. Therefore, when
`--fail-swap-on=false` is being provided on a node:
* If the kernel version equals or is above 6.4, the tmpfs noswap option is being used when necessary.
* Else, kubelet would try to mount a dummy volume with the tmpfs noswap option to understand whether the option is
  backported. If the mount succeeds, the tmpfs noswap option is being used when necessary.

> * Else, kubelet would raise a warning about the option not being supported and the possible risk.

Reviewer: - Where does the warning appear?

Author: Thanks, I've emphasized that it's being done via a log entry.

> 

Reviewer: - Will we document and announce the change from “Kubernetes guarantees that some volumes' memory would never reside on disk, e.g. Secrets, memory-backed emptyDirs, etc” to “Kubernetes makes a best effort to ensure”

We have the option of failing the Pod once the risk of paging out confidential data is detected. I think that should be the default with a kubelet configuration to emit an Event rather than fail the Pod. Failing the Pod by default maintains that guarantee. The kubelet could even specially taint nodes that don't provide the usual guarantee, requiring Pods to tolerate it.

Author: This issue had been brought up in sig-node meetings and was discussed multiple times in the past. For more information I recommend looking at https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/105978, and especially [this comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/105978#issuecomment-2078246497).

Long story short, I (and many others) think that documenting this small and temporary limitation around swap is enough. In a short while the tmpfs noswap option would be very widely supported in the vast majority of the environments. So I don't think that kubernetes is truly changing its guarantees, but rather enabling swap brings a security limitation that should indeed be properly documented.

Therefore, this feature is limited to cgroupv2 only. The main goal is to deprecate cgroupv1 eventually so this should not be a major inconvience.

#### Memory-backed volumes

Kubernetes guarantees that some volumes' memory would never reside on disk, e.g. Secrets, memory-backed emptyDirs, etc.
Behind the scenes, Kubelet mounts such volumes as tmpfs volumes on the host.

To address this risk, if `--fail-swap-on=false`, the [tmpfs noswap option](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/filesystems/tmpfs.html)
will be used in order to prevent the volumes' pages from swapping to disk.

Bear in mind that the tmpfs noswap option is fairly new and is supported in kernel versions >= 6.4. However, different
Linux distributions can decide to backport this options to older versions of the kernel. Therefore, when
`--fail-swap-on=false` is being provided on a node:
* If the kernel version equals or is above 6.4, the tmpfs noswap option is being used when necessary.
* Else, kubelet would try to mount a dummy volume with the tmpfs noswap option to understand whether the option is
  backported. If the mount succeeds, the tmpfs noswap option is being used when necessary.

> * Else, kubelet would raise a warning log entry about the option not being supported and the possible risk.

Reviewer 9: but it will mount it anyway, right?

Reviewer 4: AFAIK kubelet will fail to mount if the kernel does not support this feature. So it won’t be mounted in the “correct” way due to a limitation of the kernel.

Author: > but it will mount it anyway, right?

Not sure I understand, mount what?
This "dummy mount" will fail if the tmpfs noswap is not supported. It is basically a method to determine whether the noswap option is supported or not. If it is supported, it'll be used to mount memory-backed volumes. If not, a warning log entry will be raised, and memory-backed volumes will be mounted without the noswap option.

Hope this answers your question, let me know if you need more info

To address this risk, if `--fail-swap-on=false`, the [tmpfs noswap option](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/filesystems/tmpfs.html)
will be used in order to prevent the volumes' pages from swapping to disk.

Bear in mind that the tmpfs noswap option is fairly new and is supported in kernel versions >= 6.4. However, different
Linux distributions can decide to backport this options to older versions of the kernel. Therefore, when
`--fail-swap-on=false` is being provided on a node:
* If the kernel version equals or is above 6.4, the tmpfs noswap option is being used when necessary.
* Else, kubelet would try to mount a dummy volume with the tmpfs noswap option to understand whether the option is
  backported. If the mount succeeds, the tmpfs noswap option is being used when necessary.
* Else, kubelet would raise a warning about the option not being supported and the possible risk.

In the longer term, when this option would be very widely supported, this would no longer be a concern, hence this logic
could be dropped.

#### Evictions

Since this KEP aims to revolve around basic swap enablement and leave more advanced features to

> follow-up KEPs, swap-based evictions are out-of-scope for this KEP

Reviewer 7: Why is swap-based eviction of of the scope? Ensuring that kubelet can react to node pressure decently seems critical.

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4701#discussion_r1792651150

(that are not relevant for kubelet-level evictions) or the node must use all of its physical memory.
Since swapping is a heavy operation in terms of performance, the kernel will try avoiding
it as long as it can, and will start swapping only when it lacks physical memory.

Therefore, when swap is enabled, it is acceptable to use all the available RAM which will result in the node
using some of the swap memory.

##### Current eviction limitations

Because evictions are out-of-scope for this KEP, the eviction manager would remain swap-unaware.

Let's say that on a specific node, the kernel would start swapping when there is less than X free physical memory
available (see more detailed explanation [below](#advanced-best-practices-for-manually-setting-memory-evictions)).
This means either one of the two behaviors will take place:
1. Memory evictions threshold > X: In this scenario, kubelet's eviction manager would kick in before the kernel has
   a chance to swap memory.
   This means that the kernel would generally not be able to swap memory (unless the memory spike
   is fast enough for the eviction manager to handle).

> 1. Memory evictions threshold <= X: In this scenario, the kernel would start swapping memory before the memory threshold 

Reviewer 7: What's the expected behavior after the swap capacity has been exhausted? Do we expect the memory eviction to kick in after that?

Reviewer 4: If swap capacity is exhausted in the rare chance, oomkiller would step in. The main issue we see right now is that we are too aggressive with our memory eviction so pods are being evicted due to hitting the memory limit.

IMO this is probably the best approach we can do given the current design of Swap. Some of the user requests have been to effectively treat virtual memory = memory + swap. And allow for nodes to have a extra memory capacity and accept the limitations that swap is much lower than RAM.

Reviewer 3: in the "Memory evictions threshold <= swap level" case, we actually would evict before pods can swap, thus basically invalidating swap being set
in the "Memory evictions threshold > swap level" case, it may not be fully deterministic. either i'd expect the oom killer to kick in, or evictions, once the swap limit was met. It probably depends on node memory pressure

Reviewer 7: > in the "Memory evictions threshold > swap level" case, it may not be fully deterministic. either i'd expect the oom killer to kick in, or evictions, once the swap limit was met. It probably depends on node memory pressure

Hmm.. @haircommander the non-deterministic behavior makes it harder to expect what will happen when the node is under memory pressure. Is there still any benefit of enabling memory eviction in your opinion? 

> However, evictions will happen as soon as you are using more memory than physically present on the node. This even applies when parts of your used memory has been swapped.

> Still I personally would recommend to disable memory evictions when using the feature.

@jabdoa2 this is a good example. I'm trying to understand if this feature as-it-is is basically incompatible with the kubelet-driven eviction. And is it okay to simply ask users to disable the eviction, or is it better to make basic enhancement of the eviction to make it swap-aware.

Reviewer 3: I personally see a good argument that we advocate users disable memory eviction if swap is enabled, with the caveat that we intend on improving swappy eviction in the future. How do you feel about that @yujuhong ?

Reviewer 5: This will be a big breaking change if we disable eviction once swap is enabled. This will keep the KEP in Beta from my perspective. Also should we disable it for swap-enabled pods only?

I do not think the swap KEP in it's current shape is GA-ready. If the good use requires to use deprecated flag on kubernetes to disable eviction, it is not a good state.

Reviewer 4: > This will be a big breaking change if we disable eviction once swap is enabled. 

We are not saying that we should disable this. in the code. We want to provide some ways to work with this feature. I think that we can't expect a GA feature to solve all issues. There should be some iteration on more advanced features. Otherwise we will get a lot of features stuck in a permanent beta state.  I think swap is really a feature that users will have to tune to their own purpose. In this case, there is an option to disable memory evictions. Users can also set evictionHard settings to 0 to also avoid memory evictions. Even if we "GA" swap, I still feel that Swap is really meant for advanced users. I don't really know how to fit this into the KEP process. 

> I do not think the swap KEP in it's current shape is GA-ready. If the good use requires to use deprecated flag on kubernetes to disable eviction, it is not a good state.

So this puts the feature in an interesting state. We want to block the GA of Swap until we have a fix for evictions. To probably fix evictions, we are going to need new APIs (at least new eviction signals) so I think we should probably work on a new KEP to unblock this feature.

Some of our usecases have a lot more elaborate requirements for swap eviction ie (eviction on io metrics and psi). In this thread, we are thinking swap eviction based on overall swap totals.

I'm happy to work with others on a new KEP for swap but I think we should be clear on what exactly could unblock this KEP in this current state.

Reviewer 8: In my opinion it is definitely ready for GA. It does not break anything. In the default configuration it will just not allow you to have a RSS larger than physical memory. Just like before. It will still allow swapping and as a result better cache usage etc. Linux can make use of the additional memory.

Then there is a flag to disable eviction (experimental). With that you can choose to allow memory usage above physical memory. You obviously need to be a bit careful as exessive swapping might slow your pods down significantly. In my opinion this could be highlighted a bit more but it is generally explained already.

Reviewer 7: > Some of our usecases have a lot more elaborate requirements for swap eviction ie (eviction on io metrics and psi). In this thread, we are thinking swap eviction based on overall swap totals.

I definitely don't think we should block this feature for advanced eviction that relies on i/o metrics or PSI. 

> I personally see a good argument that we advocate users disable memory eviction if swap is enabled, with the caveat that we intend on improving swappy eviction in the future. How do you feel about that @yujuhong ?

+1 for disabling memory eviction. It seems hard and tricky to set the threshold, and the result may not be as expected. 

For swap-aware eviction, is it possible to consider only the basic case? I think that might still add values to straightforward use cases.

Reviewer 4: I’m not really sure what basic means in this case.

 Do we evict based on overall swap usage? System-oomd has this option where you give a max percentage of swap used. This protects a node from using too much swap. Eviction manager could be extended to track swap memory and we allow an eviction signal for swap, rank pods based on swap usage and delete in that order until swap utilization falls below.
 
For the case of increased memory density, maybe we ignore memory eviction and only evict on swap pressure. Though that would mean that pods that are not swapping could induce memory pressure. So maybe that isn’t a good idea.

Author: >> For swap-aware eviction, is it possible to consider only the basic case? I think that might still add values to straightforward use cases.

> I’m not really sure what basic means in this case.

+1.
I feel like the basic case isn't obvious here. Bear in mind that changing how evictions behave needs to be done with extreme care because of backward compatibility reasons. This is one of the reasons I much prefer to raise this discussion in a different KEP and make sure we discuss and understand the different options here.

   would be met. This practically means that the eviction manager would never kick in, hence it is turned off (unless
   for extreme cases where the memory spike is faster than the kernel's ability to swap memory).
   If the cluster admin sees this as a desirable state, the `--experimental-allocatable-ignore-eviction` kubelet flag
   can be used in order to emphasize that memory evictions are indeed turned off. 

The cluster admin can choose which of the above is the desired behavior.
If the first is applied, kubelet would be able to evict pods but pods would be able to swap only if memory limits
are breached.
If the second is applied, kubelet evictions would be practically disabled but node-level pressure would result in
swapping.

Advanced cluster admins can use the approach outlined [below](#advanced-best-practices-for-manually-setting-memory-evictions).

##### Advanced best-practices for manually setting memory evictions

Let's simplistically explain how the kernel decides to start swapping.

> The kernel uses three "watermarks" (i.e. thresholds), which are called "high", "min", and "low", such that high > min > low.

Reviewer 10: typo?
- `high > low > min`

Author: It isn't a typo, although I see how it can be a bit confusing.
These values represent the amount of free memory **left**, so a "high" amount of memory left is larger than a low amount of memory.

As written in the KEP itself:
```
This is a real example from a 64GB RAM machine with the default kernel configurations. On such a machine:
* The `high` watermark is at `187.32Mi`.
* The `low` watermark is at `125.54Mi`.
* The `min` watermark is at `63.76Mi`.
```

Reviewer 10: Your example seems to be 
- `low > min`

Author: Ah, you're right!
Thank you @pacoxu! Great catch! fixed

* Else, kubelet would raise a warning about the option not being supported and the possible risk.

In the longer term, when this option would be very widely supported, this would no longer be a concern, hence this logic
could be dropped.

##### Brief technical overview of swap and evictions

With swap being disabled, the memory eviction threshold should be set in a way that will let kubelet's
eviction manager identify memory spikes in time so it can execute custom logic and take care of reclaiming
memory and evicting pods before the kernel's OOM killer is invoked.

However, with swap enabled, the situation is fundamentally different.
In order for the kernel to start swapping memory, either the pod must breach its memory limits
(that are not relevant for kubelet-level evictions) or the node must use all of its physical memory.
Since swapping is a heavy operation in terms of performance, the kernel will try avoiding
it as long as it can, and will start swapping only when it lacks physical memory.

Therefore, when swap is enabled, it is acceptable to use all the available RAM which will result in the node
using some of the swap memory.

##### Current eviction limitations

> Because evictions are out-of-scope for this KEP, the eviction manager would remain swap-unaware.

Reviewer 3: not true anymore?

Author: Right :)
Addressed!

}
```

> In addition, we've added swap to stats to Summary API and Prometheus endpoints (`/stats/summary` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, we'll add swap to stats to Summary API and Prometheus endpoints (`/stats/summary` and
```

This is framed as a proposal to enhance, and not a changelog. So the proposed changes should be future tense.

`/metrics/resource`):

> ```shell

Reviewer: nit: not a valid shell script. Use <tt>```console</tt> instead.

> kubectl get --raw "/api/v1/nodes/<NODE-NAME>/proxy/metrics/resource" | grep swap
# HELP container_swap_usage_bytes [ALPHA] Current container amount of swap usage in bytes
# TYPE container_swap_usage_bytes gauge
container_swap_usage_bytes{container="c1",namespace="default",pod="test-pod"} 3.4400333824e+10 1687950863878
container_swap_usage_bytes{container="coredns",namespace="kube-system",pod="coredns-8f5847b64-t9gmr"} 0 1687950855483
# HELP node_swap_usage_bytes [ALPHA] Current node swap usage in bytes
# TYPE node_swap_usage_bytes gauge
node_swap_usage_bytes 1.8446743709127774e+19 1687950863599
# HELP pod_swap_usage_bytes [ALPHA] Current pod amount of swap usage in bytes
# TYPE pod_swap_usage_bytes gauge
pod_swap_usage_bytes{namespace="default",pod="test-pod"} 3.4379333632e+10 1687950858784
pod_swap_usage_bytes{namespace="kube-system",pod="coredns-8f5847b64-t9gmr"} 0 1687950863144
```

> ```shell

Reviewer: nit: not a valid shell script. Use <tt>```console</tt> instead.

#### GA

- Test a wide variety of scenarios that may be affected by swap support, including tests with aggressive memory stress.
- Address memory-backed backed volumes which should not have access to swap.  
- Remove feature gate.

> - Increase debug abilities by introducing a new swap condition to the node.

Reviewer 11: SWAP condition is not helpful to signal presence. For presence I wonder if we should rather use a label.
The condition would be good to indicate trouble.

Author: This is an ongoing discussion that's taking place in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/123963 and https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/125278, so I feel this is not the right place to determine these specifics.

I've reworded this requirement to the following in order to capture the main idea instead of outlining the specifics by which it would be implemented:
>Address increasing debug abilities by providing a method to easily understand which nodes are swap-enabled.

- Add e2e tests that verify pod-level control of swap utilization.
- Add e2e tests that verify swap performance with pods using a tmpfs.

For beta 2:

- Add Node-conformance tests for basic swap validation. To avoid disrupting node conformance lanes, only the
cgroup knobs are validated to be defined as expected with no real memory stress or swap use.

For beta 3:

- We want e2e tests that can confirm that eviction will take in account swap usage

For GA:

> - Add a lane dedicated for swap testing, including stress tests and other tests that might be disruptive and intensive.

Reviewer 3: FWIW I think it'd be safest to try to get this in beta 3 so we can catch potential issues as early as possible. I'd hate to have a delay to GA because we missed something a test exposed

> #### GA

Reviewer 5: Let's try to re-confirm beta criteria are satisfied:

Immidiately:

1. https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/#swap-memory doesn't have any notes about the `encrypted swap` and no examples on how to implement it.
2. Eviction: the issue https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/120800 is still open

Maybe we can checkbox other criterias.

Reviewer 5: For the eviction, it will be great to have an e2e test

Author: >1. [kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes#swap-memory](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/#swap-memory) doesn't have any notes about the encrypted swap and no examples on how to implement it.

You're correct. I do mention encrypted swap in the blog-post I wrote about beta for the 1.28 release [1] though. I'll make sure to make a PR to update https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/#swap-memory as well.

[1] https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/08/24/swap-linux-beta/#security-risk

> Eviction: the issue https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/120800 is still open

This issue is important, but pretty outdated (e.g. triaged as `triage/needs-information`) and can be closed. As said in my [comment below](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4701#issuecomment-2360345618), extending evictions is planned to be dealt with in the near future with a dedicated follow-up KEP.

Saying that, it's important to note that swap works well today without these planned extensions. There is a lot of positive feedback from users that are using swap in production regarding this, and for good reasons (although I don't want to dive into too technical details here).

> For the eviction, it will be great to have an e2e test

The only problem with such a test is that it's pretty hard to do. Swap e2e tests are pretty disruptive as is, and adding evictions to that is even more difficult and flake-prone.

Reviewer 5: Can the example of copnfiguring encrypted swap be added to the documentation?

Eviction - replied in the other comment.

Were all other graduation criteria satisfied?

Author: > Can the example of copnfiguring encrypted swap be added to the documentation?

Absolutely. I'll start working on it right away.
I've also added it as a GA criteria, alongside documenting the eviction limitations.

> Were all other graduation criteria satisfied?

This is the current status:
- [X] Test a wide variety of scenarios that may be affected by swap support, including tests with aggressive memory stress.
- [X] Address memory-backed backed volumes which should not have access to swap.  
- [ ] - Remove feature gate.
- [X] Exclude high-priority, static and mirrored pods from gaining access to swap.
- [ ] Add documentation regarding encrypted swap.
- [ ] Add documentation regarding limitations around evictions.

Author: @SergeyKanzhelev FYI that I have this ongoing PR for a blog post about swap graduating to GA on 1.32: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/48099.

I will shortly add a similar PR to update the main docs.

- Test a wide variety of scenarios that may be affected by swap support, including tests with aggressive memory stress.

> - Address memory-backed backed volumes which should not have access to swap.  

Reviewer 4: I find this section a bit confusing. We "Address memory-backed volumes" in beta. It was required for GAing this feature so I think we should move this to Beta.

Author: > We "Address memory-backed volumes" in beta.

I don't believe this is correct.
This [was implemented](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/124060) after Beta2 was released, so it merged in the time frame between Beta2 and GA. IOW, it doesn't fit as a criteria for Beta if Beta was released without it.

Am I missing something?

Reviewer 4: This reads like you want to promote this as part of the GA promotion. We have done this in the beta phase and we are clear to GA because this is done.

Author: > This reads like you want to promote this as part of the GA promotion

But this is not written anywhere in the document.
What's written is that it's a requirement for GA graduation. I think it's obvious that it would be implemented before GA graduation then.

> We have done this in the beta phase

I'm not sure what you mean by that, I guess that's a matter of terminology?

This was implemented **after Beta was released**, therefore it doesn't make sense that it's a requirement for Beta graduation.

Maybe I'm completely off but this doesn't make sense to me

Author: Either way, now that the implementation history is updated, this document outlines elsewhere that it was implemented before swap graduated to GA.

Reviewer 4: With the implementation history updated, this is a bit more clear. We have already done this work in between beta -> GA.

Sounds good to me.

- Add e2e test confirming that swap is used for `LimitedSwap`.
- Document [best practices](#best-practices) for setting up Kubernetes with swap

#### Beta 3

- Enhance website documentation
  - Docs should be close to GA quality before promoting to GA.
- Make eviction manager swap aware.

#### GA

- Test a wide variety of scenarios that may be affected by swap support, including tests with aggressive memory stress.
- Address memory-backed backed volumes which should not have access to swap.  
- Remove feature gate.
- Exclude high-priority, static and mirrored pods from gaining access to swap.
- Add documentation regarding encrypted swap.
- Test a wide variety of scenarios in which the node is being memory-stressed with different eviction and swap configurations. 

> Ensure the behavior is consistent and reliable.

Author: @dchen1107 @SergeyKanzhelev 

Would you be able to kindly review this section specifically? Do you see anything missing with these GA requirements?

As this KEP update suggests, my aim is to graduate to beta3 in 1.33 and GA in 1.34.

- Add e2e test confirming that swap is used for `LimitedSwap`.
- Document [best practices](#best-practices) for setting up Kubernetes with swap

#### Beta 3

- Enhance website documentation
  - Docs should be close to GA quality before promoting to GA.
- Make eviction manager swap aware.

#### GA

- Test a wide variety of scenarios that may be affected by swap support, including tests with aggressive memory stress.
- Address memory-backed backed volumes which should not have access to swap.  
- Remove feature gate.

> - Exclude high-priority, static and mirrored pods from gaining access to swap.

Reviewer 7: Should we move this to Beta 3 to avoid unintentional regression (i.e., such pods can gain access to swap in Beta 3 but not in GA)?

Author: Definitely, thank you!
Moved most of these to beta3 as they're already fulfilled.

- Add e2e test confirming that swap is used for `LimitedSwap`.
- Document [best practices](#best-practices) for setting up Kubernetes with swap

#### Beta 3

- Enhance website documentation
  - Docs should be close to GA quality before promoting to GA.
- Make eviction manager swap aware.
- Test a wide variety of scenarios that may be affected by swap support, including tests with aggressive memory stress.
- Address memory-backed backed volumes which should not have access to swap.  
- Add documentation regarding encrypted swap.
- Test a wide variety of scenarios in which the node is being memory-stressed with different eviction and swap configurations. 
Ensure the behavior is consistent and reliable.
- Exclude high-priority, static and mirrored pods from gaining access to swap.

#### GA

- Remove feature gate.

> - Ensure swap-conformance tests are continuously green.

Author: @SergeyKanzhelev @dchen1107

Would you be able to kindly review this section specifically? Do you see anything missing with these graduation requirements?

As this KEP update suggests, my aim is to graduate to beta3 in 1.33 and GA in 1.34.

Author: FYI @yujuhong

conversion tests if API types are being modified.
-->

There are extensive tests to ensure that the swap feature as expected.

> Unit tests are in place to test that this feature operates as expected with

Reviewer 5: I thought we limited memory swap to cgroupv2 only?

Author: Yes, you're correct.

In cgroup v1 we always set swap limit to 0. IOW swap is never accessible to workloads under v1.
What I meant here is that the tests validate this behavior.

  - 99,9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code
-->

Swap is being managed by the kernel, depends on many factors and configurations
that are outside of kubelet's reach like the nature of the workloads running on the node,
swap capacity, memory capacity and other distro-specific configurations. However, generally:

> - Nodes with swap enabled -> `node.swap.swapAvailableBytes` should be non-zero.
> - Nodes with memory pressure -> `node.swap.swapUsageBytes` should be non-zero.
> - Containers that reach their memory limit threshold -> `pods[i].containers[i].swap.swapUsageBytes` should be non-zero.
> - Pods with containers that reach their memory limit threshold -> `pods[i].swap.swapUsageBytes` should be non-zero. 

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
- Nodes with swap enabled → `node.swap.swapAvailableBytes` should be non-zero.
- Nodes with memory pressure → `node.swap.swapUsageBytes` should be non-zero.
- Containers that reach their memory limit threshold → `pods[i].containers[i].swap.swapUsageBytes` should be non-zero.
- Pods with containers that reach their memory limit threshold → `pods[i].swap.swapUsageBytes` should be non-zero.
```

accounting may become much less accurate. This may make cluster administration
more difficult and less predictable.

In general, swap is less predictable and might cause performance degradation.
It also might be hard in certain scenarios to understand why certain workloads
are the chosen candidates for swapping, which could occur for reasons external
to the workload.

In addition, containers with memory limits would be killed less frequently
since with swap enabled the kernel can usually reclaim a lot more memory.
While this can help to avoid crashes, it could also "hide a problem" of a container
reaching its memory limits.

## Alternatives

### Just set `--fail-swap-on=false`

When `--fail-swap-on=false` is provided to Kubelet but swap is not configured
otherwise it is guaranteed that, by default, no Kubernetes workloads would
be able to utilize swap. However, everything outside of kubelet's reach
(e.g. system daemons, kubelet, etc) would be able to use swap.

> ## Infrastructure Needed (Optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Infrastructure Needed
```
(we do need this section)

- **2023-04-17:** KEP update for beta1 [#3957](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3957).
- **2023-08-15:** Beta1 released in kubernetes 1.28
- **2024-01-12:** Updates to Beta2 KEP.

> - **2024-01-08:** Beta2 released in kubernetes 1.30.

Reviewer 4: tmpfs noswap support went in for 1.31 right?

Author: Yes, that's correct (was done in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/124060)

Reviewer 4: So should we mention that in the timestamps?

Reviewer 4: We technically did some work on it for 1.31 that was critical for this feature.

Author: I thought this section just outlines how the KEP itself advanced and not every implementation that have happened. But yeah, that makes total sense.

Let me add more data to this section. I'll also add data about previous implementations as well :+1:

Author: Thanks again for catching that @kannon92!
Done :) PTAL
